Although humans and our hominid ancestors have been cultural animals throughout our evolutionary history, something unique occurred in our lineage during the Middle and Upper Paleolithic.  After many millennia with varied but relatively small toolkits, and material culture which varied little across wide areas and continents, our cultural repertoire began to explode.  The artifactual toolkit became larger and its constituent tools and technologies more complex, the range of materials used to construct it was enriched, and our solutions to the problems of everyday life became regionalized and differentiated.  Furthermore, the economic basis of our lives began to broaden and also, in many areas, to become specialized.  (REF)  Paleoanthropologists and archaeologists have long noted this transition,  often of as a sharp change or "revolution"  that occurred quite suddenly.  

Careful examination of the Middle Paleolithic archaeological record, especially in Africa and the Near East, suggests that this change in human behavior was not a sharp "revolution," and that much of the enriched material culture we later characterize as the "Upper Paleolithic" had precursors in many areas, some up to several hundred thousand years ago, which did not persist.  But whether the cumulative enrichment and complexification of human culture happened quickly or slowly, it remains a central puzzle in the evolution of our species.  The transmission of culture became strongly cumulative, and while we may have innovated and tried new tools and behaviors in the past as well, innovation and differentation became hallmarks of what we now think of as "human culture."  

Explanations for behavioral modernity in the late Pleistocene are many, and we do not review them all here (see REF for reviews).  We see no evidence that ancestral sapiens was biologically incapable of rich, cumulative culture, and indeed the better we understand the Middle Paleolithic in Asia and Africa, the more we see evidence for  transient occurrences of complex toolkits and personal adornment.   Those scholars examining the nature of social learning processes themselves are, we believe, on the right track.  Demography has been suggested as a possible explanation, since reduced cultural diversity and loss of toolkit elements have been documented in Tasmania during a population bottleneck (REFS).  But a recent comparative study shows that population size itself is only weakly associated (if at all) with toolkit diversity (except possibly during bottlenecks).  Premo (REF) has examined whether metapopulation dynamics, with local extinction and recolonization, might account for the retention and expansion of diversity, with promising results.  XXXX have suggested that changes in the mode of cultural transmission might result in more cultural diversity; if a population evolves to employ conformity less as a social learning rule, we would expect diversity to increase.  

The full story of "behavioral modernity" is likely to be a complex narrative, not reducible to a single change, especially since it did not occur at a single moment, but was instead a slow evolution over tens or hundreds of millennia.  Demography, and the metapopulation dynamics of individual demes or groups, likely played roles.  Changes in the way individuals learned skills and information likely played a role.  Sterelny (2012) sums up the multi-factor view nicely:  

> ...the cultural learning characteristic of the Upper Paleolithic transition and later periods of human culture—social transmission with both a large bandwidth and sufficient accuracy for incremental improvement—requires individual cognitive adaptations for cultural learning, highly structured learning environments, and population structures that both buffer existing resources effectively and support enough specialization to generate a supply of innovation.

In addition to existing work on the effects of population size and metapopulation structure on the results of cumulative cultural transmission, 



 